docs: rewrite docu for docker setup (#1746)
GIScience/openrouteservice: docs/run-instance/running-with-docker.md

```

Now start openrouteservice in the background:
```shell
docker compose up -d
```

This will pull the openrouteservice of the selected version and start it up using an example setup
and the provided test OSM file for Heidelberg/Germany and surrounding area.

To see the container's logs, run
```shell
docker compose logs 
```
or 
```shell
docker compose logs -tf  
```
to follow the log.

To stop the container again, execute
```shell
docker compose stop 
```
or
```shell
docker compose down
```
to stop and remove the container.

The file `docker-compose.yml` contains plenty of commented options with descriptions. 
You can un-comment those options and set your custom option values.

::: details Running without docker compose
It is easier to modify the Docker compose file, but to test a specific setup, you can also run a command similar to what docker compose would run directly on the command line. 
Here is a basic example:
```shell
# create directories for volumes to mount as local user
mkdir -p ors-docker/config ors-docker/elevation_cache ors-docker/graphs ors-docker/files ors-docker/logs 

> docker run -dt -u "${UID}:${GID}" \
>   --name ors-app \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
docker run -dt --name ors-app \
```

Reviewer: Let's keep the UID and GID out of the examples. If the host user has another UID/GID than 1000:1000 it'll cause problems.

  -p 8080:8082 \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/config:/home/ors/config \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/elevation_cache:/home/ors/elevation_cache \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/graphs:/home/ors/graphs \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/files:/home/ors/files \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/logs:/home/ors/logs \
  #-e "BUILD_GRAPHS=True" \

>   -e "JAVA_OPTS=-Djava.awt.headless=true -server -XX:TargetSurvivorRatio=75 -XX:SurvivorRatio=64 -XX:MaxTenuringThreshold=3 -XX:+UseG1GC -XX:+ScavengeBeforeFullGC -XX:ParallelGCThreads=4 -Xms1g -Xmx2g" \
>   -e "CATALINA_OPTS=-Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.port=9001 -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.rmi.port=9001 -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.authenticate=false -Dcom.sun.management.jmxremote.ssl=false -Djava.rmi.server.hostname=localhost" \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  -e "XMS=1g" \
  -e "XMX=2g \
```

Reviewer: Let's keep the JAVA_OPTS and CATALINA_OPTS out of the example. Only xmx and xms are essential in this quick example, imo

  local/openrouteservice:latest 
```
:::

## What you get

After some seconds, your openrouteservice should be running:
```shell
curl http://localhost:8080/ors/v2/health
{"status":"ready"}
```

When you have started the container as described, a directory `ors-docker` with some sub directories and files are created by docker:
```shell
.
├── docker-compose.yml
└── ors-docker
    ├── config
    │   ├── example-ors-config.env      
    │   ├── example-ors-config.yml     
    │   └── ors-config.yml
    ├── elevation_cache
    │   ├── srtm_38_03.gh
    │   └── srtm_38_03.zip
    ├── files
    │   └── example-heidelberg.osm.gz
    ├── graphs
    │   └── car
    │       ├── edges
    │       ├── ...
    │       ├── ...
    │       └── turn_costs
    └── logs
        └── ors.log

> 8 directories, 35 files

Reviewer: Nice!

* `elevation_cache`: Directory, where openrouteservice stores downloaded elevation data to avoid repeated downloads.
* `example-heidelberg.osm.gz`: The initial sample OSM data used to run the container in its initial setup. Normally, you will remove this file or add another OSM file to the same directory and adapt your config to use your file.
* `graphs`: Directory for the generated graphs. Initially, there is only `car` because this is the only enabled routing profile in the default `ors-config.yml`
* `logs`: Here, the openrouteservice logs are stored. :warning: Logs of several runs will be accumulated here. In contrast, the logs you get with `docker compose logs` are only logs of the current run, but on the other hand they contain very helpful logging from docker or the entrypoint script, which is not visible in the files in `logs`.    

### Avoid files owned by root

> With the default `docker-compose.yml`, the generated files are owned by root. 
> If you don't have root permissions (sudo) you e.g. cannot edit or add files in `ors-docker/config`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the default `docker-compose.yml`, the generated files are owned by root. 
If you don't have root permissions (sudo) or you just don't want root owned files in your bind-mounts from the container, e.g. cannot edit or add files in `ors-docker/config`, the container provides the possibility to be run with UID 1000 and GID 1000. To be able to access these files, you need to have either the UID 1000 or be part of the group 1000 on your docker host machine.
```

Of course, you can configure openrouteservice with the help of the `docker-compose.yml` (see [here](#set-openrouteservice-properties-in-docker-composeyml)) or a referenced environment file (see [there](#set-openrouteservice-properties-in-an-environment-file)), 
which needs not to be located in the config folder because the openrouteservice running inside docker don't need to 'see' the environment file. 

But if you for example want to save a new pbf file to `ors-docker/files`, then you need sudo rights.

To avoid root ownership of the generated folders and files, 

1. uncomment the 'user' line in your `docker-compose.yml`:
    ```yaml
        #user: "1000:1000" // [!code --]
        user: "1000:1000" // [!code ++]

>     ```

Reviewer: This is only true, if the host user UID and GID are 1000:1000 as well. Else it'll clash again, and the user will need sudo. Chicken-and-egg problem.

I'd say we should just describe three scenarios here:
1. Run as is -> Sudo
2. Run as 1000:1000 user. Implies the host user is either part of group 1000 and/or user with id 1000 or has the needed permissions to chown files and folders.
3. Run with your host UID and GID -> Requires to build the docker image from source with the IDs as build-args.

Author: Explained below

Reviewer: fair enough.

2. create the folders with your user, so your user should be owner of the folders:
    ```shell

>     mkdir -p ors-docker/config ors-docker/elevation_cache ors-docker/files ors-docker/graphs ors-docker/logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    mkdir -p ors-docker/config ors-docker/elevation_cache ors-docker/files ors-docker/graphs ors-docker/logs
    sudo chown -R 1000:1000 ors-docker
```

Author: Why chown when user 1000:1000 creates the folders?
Some lines below I describe how to act with a different uid - the I would need to mention, that here chown -R 1000:1000 needs to be adapted - too complicated IMO - so omit chown

```
or 
```shell
docker compose logs -tf  
```
to follow the log.

To stop the container again, execute
```shell
docker compose stop 
```
or
```shell
docker compose down
```
to stop and remove the container.

The file `docker-compose.yml` contains plenty of commented options with descriptions. 
You can un-comment those options and set your custom option values.

::: details Running without docker compose
It is easier to modify the Docker compose file, but to test a specific setup, you can also run a command similar to what docker compose would run directly on the command line. 
Here is a basic example:
```shell
# create directories for volumes to mount as local user
mkdir -p ors-docker/config ors-docker/elevation_cache ors-docker/graphs ors-docker/files ors-docker/logs 
docker run -dt --name ors-app \
  -p 8080:8082 \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/config:/home/ors/config \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/elevation_cache:/home/ors/elevation_cache \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/graphs:/home/ors/graphs \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/files:/home/ors/files \
  -v $PWD/ors-docker/logs:/home/ors/logs \
  #-e "BUILD_GRAPHS=True" \
  -e "XMS=1g" \
  -e "XMX=2g \
  local/openrouteservice:latest 
```
:::

## What you get

> After some seconds, your openrouteservice should be running:

Reviewer 2: I think this is a bit optimistic…

```suggestion
After some time, your openrouteservice should be running:
```

With the default `docker-compose.yml`, the generated files are owned by root. 
If you don't have root permissions (sudo) or you just don't want root owned files in your bind-mounts from the container, e.g. cannot edit or add files in `ors-docker/config`, the container provides the possibility to be run with UID 1000 and GID 1000. To be able to access these files, you need to have either the UID 1000 or be part of the group 1000 on your docker host machine.
Of course, you can configure openrouteservice with the help of the `docker-compose.yml` (see [here](#set-openrouteservice-properties-in-docker-composeyml)) or a referenced environment file (see [there](#set-openrouteservice-properties-in-an-environment-file)), 
which needs not to be located in the config folder because the openrouteservice running inside docker don't need to 'see' the environment file. 

But if you for example want to save a new pbf file to `ors-docker/files`, then you need sudo rights.

To avoid root ownership of the generated folders and files, 

1. uncomment the 'user' line in your `docker-compose.yml`:
    ```yaml
        #user: "1000:1000" // [!code --]
        user: "1000:1000" // [!code ++]
    ```

> 2. create the folders with your user, so your user should be owner of the folders:

Reviewer 2: This is also mentioned in the `docker-compose.yml` but the two commands aren't the same??

Author: Good hint, changed it in docker-compose.yml

you can change the volumes section in your `docker-compose.yml`. 

In the following example, a user has a directory `/data/osm` with OSM files. The user wants to reference the files from there directly instead of copying the large files somewhere else. 
And the graph files generated by openrouteservice should also be stored into a different location, where more disk space is available than in the home directory, let's say in `/data/ors/graphs`.

The directories required by the internal openrouteservice are mounted individually, 
the paths on the host system are defined before the colon, the (unchanged) directory inside the container behind the colon. 

```yaml
    volumes:  # Mount relative directories. ONLY for local container runtime. To switch to docker managed volumes see 'Docker Volumes configuration' section below.
      - ./ors-docker:/home/ors // [!code --]
      - /data/ors/graphs:/home/ors/graphs // [!code ++]
      - ./ors-docker/elevation_cache:/home/ors/elevation_cache // [!code ++]
      - ./ors-docker/config:/home/ors/config // [!code ++]
      - ./ors-docker/logs:/home/ors/logs // [!code ++]
      - /data/osm:/home/ors/files // [!code ++]
```

> The source_file configured in `ors-config.yml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With these changes, a `source_file` configured in `ors-config.yml`:
```

```yaml
     source_file: ./files/andorra-latest.osm.pbf
```

> References now the file `/data/osm/andorra-latest.osm.pbf` on the host file system.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
now references the file `/data/osm/andorra-latest.osm.pbf` on the host file system.
```

::: warning Note
When individual host directories are mounted to the internal sub directories of `/home/ors`,
no directory can be mounted directly to the internal `/home/ors`!
:::

## Use Volumes

> Instead using bind mounts, you can use volumes. Uncomment **and complete** the volume definition in the `docker-compose.yml` (see [docker compose documentation](https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/07-volumes/)):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Instead of using bind mounts, you can use volumes. Uncomment **and complete** the volume definition in the `docker-compose.yml` (see [docker compose documentation](https://docs.docker.com/compose/compose-file/07-volumes/)):
```

      #- ./logs:/home/ors/logs  # Mount logs directory individually // [!code --]
      #- ./files:/home/ors/files  # Mount files directory individually // [!code --]
      #- ./ors-docker:/home/ors  # Mount the ORS application directory (for logs, graphs, elevation_cache, etc.) into its own directory // [!code ++]
      - graphs:/home/ors/graphs  # Mount graphs directory individually // [!code ++]
      - elevation_cache:/home/ors/elevation_cache  # Mount elevation cache directory individually // [!code ++]
      - config:/home/ors/config  # Mount configuration directory individually // [!code ++]
      - logs:/home/ors/logs  # Mount logs directory individually // [!code ++]
      - files:/home/ors/files  # Mount files directory individually // [!code ++]
```

## Configure

When using the openrouteservice docker image, you have several configuration options: 

* You can use a configuration file as you would do when running openrouteservice as JAR or WAR. If you are the owner of the files in `ors-docker/config`, this is straight forward (see [above](#avoid-files-owned-by-root)).
* You can set configuration properties as environment variables in the `docker-compose.yml` 

> * or in an environment file. This is good practice for docker containers in general and the preferred way to configure dockered openrouteservice when the files are oned by root.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* or you can set configuration properties in an environment file. This is good practice for docker containers in general and the preferred way to configure dockered openrouteservice when the files are owned by root.  
```

> The following sections explain the options in more detail.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following sections explain these options in more detail.
```

> For detailed information on the settings you can make, see the chapter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For detailed information on the configuration settings you can make, see the chapter
```

on [configuration](/run-instance/configuration/index.md).

::: tip
If you want to re-build the graphs, many people just delete the graphs folders and restart openrouteservice.
If you are not owner of the graphs files (but root), you _cannot_ delete those files without root permissions.
In this case, you can set the environment variable `REBUILD_GRAPHS=True` in your [`docker-compose.yml`](#set-openrouteservice-properties-in-docker-composeyml) (the option is contained in the file, just un-comment it)
or in your [`ors-config.env`](#set-openrouteservice-properties-in-an-environment-file). 
openrouteservice will then re-build all activated graphs on the next startup.
:::

### Use (customized) config file

As described in [Configuration > File location](/run-instance/configuration/index.md#file-location), 

> when openrouteservice is startet, it looks for a file named `ors-config.yml` in different directories and uses the file, if it exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when openrouteservice is started, it looks for a file named `ors-config.yml` in different directories and uses the file, if it exists.
```

Alternatively, an individually named or located configuration file (YAML or the deprecated JSON config) can be used by setting the environment variable `ORS_CONFIG_LOCATION`.

In the Docker version, there is an initialization script that is executed on each container start, 

> which is doing slightly different automagic:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which is using a slightly different approach:
```

> * It checks, if `ORS_CONFIG_LOCATION` is set and if the referenced file (YAML or the deprecated JSON config) can be found (the path is evaluated from inside the container).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* It checks if `ORS_CONFIG_LOCATION` is set and if the referenced file (YAML or the deprecated JSON config) [can be found](#directories-inside-the-container-and-on-the-host) 
```

Author: I added the cross reference. Not exactly your suggestion, but nearly.

```yaml
    environment:
      # ----------------- Properties configuration ------------------- #
      # Configure your whole container with only property ENVs.
      # These can be set alternatively or additionally to the yml configuration file.
      # Note, that any values set will override the corresponding values from the yml configuration file.
      # See the ors-config.env file for more options.
      # To have a configuration file-less container, uncomment at least the following properties.
      # The values are examples and provide the default configuration.
      ors.engine.source_file: /home/ors/files/andorra-latest.osm.pbf
      ors.engine.profiles.car.enabled: false
      ors.engine.profiles.wheelchair.enabled: true
      # Here you can also set more advanced spring and tomcat properties, such as proxy settings.
      # See the spring documentation for a complete list of options: https://docs.spring.io/spring-boot/docs/current/reference/html/application-properties.html
      #server.tomcat.remote-ip-header=x-your-remote-ip-header
      #server.tomcat.protocol-header=x-your-protocol-header
```

::: warning Hint

> Remember that the container has to be created from new to make changes in `docker-compose.yml` take effect!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Remember that the container has to be newly created for the changes in `docker-compose.yml` to take effect!
```

`docker compose stop && docker compose start` or `docker compose restart` is not enough, you have to execute 
```shell
docker compose down && docker compose up
```
:::

The syntax/name of the configuration properties is not yaml but instead the syntax from java properties files.
But it is just a different syntax. The properties are the same as described in [Configuration > File Formats](/run-instance/configuration/index.md#file-formats).

### Set openrouteservice properties in an Environment file

> Configuring properties in `docker-compose.yml` is a good way to set a hand full of properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Configuring properties in `docker-compose.yml` is a good way to set a handful of properties.
```

> If you want to customize a big number of properties or if you maybe have different configurations in use,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to customize a great number of properties or if you maybe have different configurations in use,
```

it is more convenient to save the properties to a separate file.

The properties that were set in in the `docker-compose.yml` snippet in the previous section could instead be set in a separete file `ors-config.env`.
The only difference is, that equal signs are used instead of colons:

```
ors.engine.source_file=/home/ors/files/andorra-latest.osm.pbf
ors.engine.profiles.car.enabled=false
ors.engine.profiles.wheelchair.enabled=true
```

The env file has to be referenced in the `docker-compose.yml`:
```yaml
    # ----------------- ENV file configuration ------------------- #
    # Too many variables for your 'environment:' section?
    # Use an env_file with the ENV properties instead and define everything in there:
    # Values will be overwritten if set in the 'environment' section.
#    env_file: ors-config.env // [!code --]
    env_file: ors-config.env // [!code ++]
```

If you want to use this configuration option and you start creating your environment file, 

> you can use the file `ors-docker/config/example-ors-config.env` as template. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you can use the file `ors-docker/config/example-ors-config.env` as a template. 
```

Copy it next to your `docker-compose.yml` or rename it.
You should never edit the file `ors-docker/config/example-ors-config.env` because it will be replaced by openrouteservice in some cases!

## Troubleshooting

> If openrouteservice cannot be started or does not operate as expected, most important is to check the logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If openrouteservice cannot be started or does not operate as expected, it is most important to check the logs.
```

There are two ways to inspect the logs, with some differences: `docker compose logs` and `ors-docker/logs/ors.log`

| `docker compose logs`                            | `ors-docker/logs/ors.log`                                                                       | 
|--------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| logs from docker entrypoint and openrouteservice | logs from openrouteservice only                                                                 |
| logs from the current container only             | logs from previous containers that were removed with e.g. `docker compose down` still available |

> We will focus here on the logs from docker compose because here is additional information available. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section will focus on the logs from docker because they contain additional information.
```

To see the container's entrypoint logs, change into your directory with the `docker-compose.yml` and run 
```shell
docker compose logs
```

The first logged lines are written by the entrypoint script inside the container, 

> which is executed on each container start, before the internal openrouteservice is started.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first logged lines are written by the entrypoint script inside the container
which is executed on each container start _before_ the internal openrouteservice is started.
```

ors-app  | 2024-03-12T08:13:19.199766895Z #######################################
ors-app  | 2024-03-12T08:13:19.200084573Z ✓ CATALINA_OPTS and JAVA_OPTS ready. For details set CONTAINER_LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG.
ors-app  | 2024-03-12T08:13:19.200120626Z #####################
ors-app  | 2024-03-12T08:13:19.200127702Z # ORS startup phase #
ors-app  | 2024-03-12T08:13:19.200129261Z #####################
ors-app  | 2024-03-12T08:13:19.200130392Z ✓ 🙭 Ready to start the ORS application 🙭
```

As explained in the log, by setting `CONTAINER_LOG_LEVEL=DEBUG` in the `docker-compose.yml` you get more information.
This setting is only relevant for the entrypoint logging, it does not change the log level of openrouteservice.
How you can achieve this is documented in the [logging documentation](/run-instance/configuration/spring/logging.md).

::: warning Hint
Remember that the container has to be created from new to make changes in `docker-compose.yml` take effect!
`docker compose stop && docker compose start` or `docker compose restart` is not enough, you have to execute
```shell
docker compose down && docker compose up -d
```

> :::

Reviewer 2: Same hint, sync with changes from above.

Reviewer 2: This is still missing :)

Author: Sorry, really thought I already changed this. Adapted it now.
